[http://digitalcommons.hope.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1075&context=curcp\\\_13](http://digitalcommons.hope.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1075&context=curcp\_13)
Changing Methods, Changing Libraries: Making Digital Literacy Accessible
for Undergraduate Researchers

C H A N G I N G M E T H O D S , C H A N G I N G L I B R A R I E S :
Making Digital Literacy Accessible for Undergraduate Researchers \[\] A
B S T R A C T Rooted in research accomplished in the summer of 2013 with
a fellowship from the Andrew W. Mellon Scholars Foundation, this project
focuses on the rapidly changing landscapes of scholarship and
storytelling in the Humanities. These changes have come about as myriad
of digital tools are now available to undergraduate scholars. From
showcasing to researching, students now have unprecedented access to and
support for these tools. I show through personal experience as an
undergraduate Digital Humanities researcher that as these supplements
are honed and further developed, they allow student scholars to ask new
questions in their research, answer them accordingly, and display their
original work in a refreshing and wide reaching manner. However, these
advances in digital methods also raise concerns for sustainability and
integration with traditional research. Hope College's Van WylenLibrary
is an example of an institution that strives to be on the leading edge
of the digital humanities and is seeking to address these concerns.
Knowing that collaboration is the backbone of a thriving digital liberal
arts community, it has taken steps to create new conversations between
communities and individuals. I propose several ways in which Van Wylen
has accomplished this, as well as several ways that they can in the
future. As digital librarianship shows, though technological advances
tools are shifting the way scholars think about research, storytelling
is still the heart of scholarship . W H A T I S T H I S P R O J E C T ?
Through a collaborative push to create outlets for showcasing student
scholarship, we initiated and carried out a redesign of the Special
Collections at Hope College website. The Rare Books, Joint Archives,
Digital Commons, and Image Collections pages have been rewritten and
reorganized to better display the archival material and primary sources
that are available. To further encourage students to tackle research
topics using the Special Collections, we created an accompanying
showcase page.

The student scholarship page displays both course projects and student
projects. Course projects are assignments given to an entire class that
utilize the Special Collections. Similarly, student projects are
undertakings by individual students and their faculty advisors that use
resources from the collections. By showcasing these projects, the
Special Collections website inspires both students and faculty seeking
to create their own, distinctive scholarship. It also serves as a
platform for students to disseminate their work through the college
website. By linking to these select projects, a standard of excellence
in collaboration and creative scholarship is formed.

W H Y D O E S I T M A T T E R ? The intention of the digital project has
been twofold. First, it serves as a way for Van Wylen Library to better
communicate the richness of the Special Collections at Hope College. By
redesigning the pages and adding new features, the site makes these
collections more appealing and accessible to students. With clearer and
more concise copy and layout, the pages bring the collections to life.
Faculty can point their students to these pages, encouraging them to
find the collection that engages their interest. Student projects are
shown as examples of the kind of cutting edge research and scholarship
that can be created in synthesis with the primary sources in the
collections.

Secondly, the goal of this digital project is to reveal how the library
and students can collaborate, both creatively and practically. The
redesign of the Special Collections page is just one of many steps that
even a small library like Van Wylen can take to further the digital
literacy of their students giving them the ability to find and create
original scholarship, as well collaborate, present, and sustain it
through digital tools and resources. Andrew W. Mellon Scholars
Foundation & The Hope College English Department Taylor Rebhan “Digital
humanities can enable researchers and students to test out and compare
the implications of different models of thinking. They can pick up the
gaps and the silences as well as the 'certainties,' and experiment with
the challenges of ‘what if?'” Elton Barker The Special Collections at
Hope College webpage, redesigned through collaborative work to include a
showcase. <http://www.hope.edu/lib/special> , courtesy of Hope College,
1.  The Student Scholarship Showcase on the Special Collections

website.
[http://www.hope.edu/lib/special/student\\\_scholarship](http://www.hope.edu/lib/special/student\_scholarship)
courtesy of Hope College, 2014.

H O W C A N I U S E I T ? As part of my senior Mellon Scholars project,
the Digital and Multimedia Tools page has been my main focus. My goal
for this resource is to give back to the library and student community
that it came from. By making an updateable, well organized, researched
list of digital tools and resources for current and future student
researchers, I was able to make my scholarship lift weight in a
scholarly and creative way.

There are links for project ideas and supplements to papers, tools to
aide in writing and researching, methods for digital presentations, and
a wide array of online dissemination options. This is active digital
literacy: equipping students with the tools they need to become
proficient digital liberal arts majors. It is more than just teaching
research methods and how to acquire knowledge online. It encourages
creative models of scholarship and distribution. Fostering these digital
skills in undergraduate researchers is essential for a liberal arts
school in this day and age, and as the Special Collections webpages
show, Van Wylen library is well equipped to do that. A section of the
Digital and Multimedia Tools page.
[http://www.hope.edu/lib/special/student\\\_scholarship](http://www.hope.edu/lib/special/student\_scholarship)

courtesy of Hope College, 2014.

The Path E N G L I S H 4 9 5 : A M E R I C A N B I O G R A P H Y The
seeds for this senior project were planted the spring semester of my
junior year. I was enrolled in English 495, American Biography. As part
of a well rounded liberal arts education, we were required to include a
digital element with our biographical profiles. This supplement was
meant to stretch and enhance our storytelling abilities, using digital
tools to create something equally as individual as our biographies. Our
challenge, then, was to translate the tactile experience of being in the
archives into a digital medium. For my classmate Cara Haley and me, it
was important to find a way to tell these stories long past the end of
the semester and broadcast them to a larger audience. We began to
develop the blueprint for an online exhibit so that our projects the
persons we had grown to know, understand, and cherish would have a life
beyond the archives. S U M M E R 2 0 1 3 R E S E A R C H G R A N T
Seeing the need for a larger scale student scholarship showcase,
Professor Natalie Dykstra, Cara, and myself met with Hope College CIT
and Van Wylen library staff. We discovered that with faculty leadership,
the possibility of a large scale student scholarship showcase would be
likely to receive support. We wrote a research proposal outlining the
plan for a “proof of concept” website. The proposal was approved and I
received a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon foundation. I researched
various digital showcasing methods and utilized Omeka to expand the
exhibit for English 495 and add the capacity for other classes and
projects. By creating an example of what an online showcase could offer
faculty and students, I was able to tackle several questions about the
way academic research can be presented digitally. I developed an answer
to the difference between archiving work and showcasing it, proposed
theories about the duration of a project's online life, and researched
copyright rules related to archival work and web displays .

This research became the basis for the redesign of the Special
Collections webpage and creation of the Scholarship Showcase. From the
American Biography Showcase Homepage

http//:www.hopestudentresearch.omeka.net

After consulting with our classmates and peers, Cara and I found a
trend: exciting original research is produced in many upper level
classes, but with the understanding that only a handful of projects will
be seen by an audience outside of their class and discipline, much less
Hope College. We had discovered an issue of academic visibility and
sustainability, and this where we found our main drive. Cara and I
grappled with how we could preserve the high level collaborative
research being produced not by burying it in a digital archive, but by
displaying and sustaining it with the support of a collaborative
community. What if we could be on the leading edge of showcasing our
work, not only engaging in our respective scholarly conversations, but
beginning a new one? From the Anna Ellenbaas Exhibit

T h e F u t u r e W H A T W E L E A R N E D The Special Collections are
just a small selection of the vast array of library resources offered by
Hope College. However, these collections proved to be the perfect
platform for digital renovation. It is our hope that this project will
begin many more conversations about showcasing and archiving student
scholarship, particularly research that uses digital tools and display
methods. Because research within the Special Collections is often suited
for integration with digital tools, the projects that are linked to on
the showcase page are perfect examples of cutting edge digital
scholarship.

As demonstrated by the path of this project, collaboration whether it's
between students and faculty, students and the library, or otherwise is
the backbone of a thriving digital scholarship community. When
conversations occur between communities and individuals, solutions and
new ideas for scholarship arise .

Sustaining these conversations is key. To make one's research viable is
to make it public -- and the digital humanities can make that happen.

L O O K I N G F O R W A R D The following are three suggestions for
continuing to develop an active digital humanities community within the
context of undergraduate research and librarianship. 1. Create a support
system and community within the library specifically dedicated to assist
with showcasing work. This would be a direct application of a resource
such as the Digital and Multimedia Tools page. With a network of
feedback and guidance, student that utilize these tools would have the
help necessary to ensure that their projects successfully supplement
their scholarly work.

1.  Broaden the scope of the student showcase, allowing for a
    cross-disciplinary, college-wide resource. By standardizing the
    procedures and guidelines for an online gallery of student
    scholarship, questions of copyright and project duration would be
    definitively answered. Students and faculty would have a guaranteed
    outlet and audience, allowing their high-caliber work to actively
    engage in conversation even after the semester ends.

2.  Offer digital literacy workshops for faculty and students. By
    integrating a creative digital education with traditional scholarly
    training, new and exciting questions can be asked, answered, and
    broadcast to the world.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y Barker, Elton, Chris Bissell, Lorna Hardwick,
Allan Jones, Mia Ridge, and John Wolffe . “Colloquium: Digital
technologies: Help or hindrance for the humanities?” Arts and Humanities
in Higher Education Feb/Apr 2012 11, 185-200.Borgman, Christine L.
Scholarship in the Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure, and the
Internet.

Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2007. Print. Farge, Arlette, Thomas Scott-Railton ,
and Natalie Zemon Davis. The Allure of the Archives. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2013. Print. Gold, Matthew K. Debates in the Digital
Humanities . Minneapolis: Univ Of Minnesota, 2012. Print. Pannapacker ,
William. "No More Digitally Challenged Liberal-Arts Majors."
Chronicle.com . The Chronicle of Higher Education, 18 Nov. 2013. Web. 20
Nov. 2013.

. "No More Indiana Jones Warehouses." The Chronicle of Higher Education
59.14 (2012). Academic OneFile . Web. 30 Mar. 2014.

. "Stop Calling It 'Digital Humanities'; And 9 other strategies to help
liberal-arts colleges join the movement." The Chronicle of Higher
Education 59.24 (2013). Academic OneFile . Web. 12 Nov. 2013.
Rydberg-Cox, Jeffrey A. Digital Libraries and the Challenges of Digital
Humanities . Oxford: Chandos , 2006. Print. Scanlon, Eileen. “Digital
futures: Changes in scholarship, open educational resources and the
inevitability of interdisciplinarity.” Arts and Humanities in Higher
Education. Feb/Apr 2012 11: 177-184. Schreibman , Susan, Raymond G.
Siemens, and John Unsworth . A Companion to Digital Humanities . Malden,
Mass: Blackwell Pub, 2004. Print .

T H A N K S

I would like to thank the following for their support throughout the
creation of this project: the Andrew W. Mellon Scholars Program at Hope
College, for providing the training and resources that made this
possible; the Hope English Department, for their encouragement and
community; my project mentor, Professor Natalie Dykstra, for sticking
with this rollercoaster even from Boston; my classmate, colleague, and
Hope alumnus Cara Haley, for being the articulate side of a wonderful
partnership; and the Van Wylen Library, particularly Kelly Jacobsma and
Chris Gould, for this opportunity and their guidance.
